# Schema Annotations Specification

#### Version 1.0.0 (DRAFT)
The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in <a href="https://tools.ietf.org/html/bcp14" target="_blank">BCP 14:octicons-link-external-24:</a> <a href="https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119" target="_blank">RFC2119:octicons-link-external-24:</a> <a href="https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8174" target="_blank">RFC8174:octicons-link-external-24:</a> when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

This document is licensed under <a href="https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.html" target="_blank">The Apache License, Version 2.0:octicons-link-external-24:</a>.

#### Disclaimer

TODO

## Introduction

The Schema Annotation Specification (SAS) defines a set of standard annotations to describe entities and properties within a data schema. The annotations are independent of the schema definition language used. They can therefore be applied alongside any schema definition language that supports annotations (e.g., JSON Schema, Avro Schema, Protobuf, XSD, etc.).

Defining schema annotations through an open specification is useful for:

- Add descriptive metadata directly within the schema used to describe how data is structured and encoded. 
- Developers can use the schema specification language they prefer and embed in it metadata without having to learn a separate formalization to specify them
- Wherever the schema is used also the metadata are available
- The tools that extract metadata from the schema can leverage standardized semantics to interpret their meaning and use them in the proper way

## Table of Contents

- [Schema Annotations Specification](#schema-annotations-specification)
			- [Version 1.0.0 (DRAFT)](#version-100-draft)
			- [Disclaimer](#disclaimer)
	- [Introduction](#introduction)
	- [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
	- [Definitions](#definitions)
			- [Standard](#standard)
			- [Standard Specification](#standard-specification)
			- [Standard Definition](#standard-definition)
			- [Schema](#schema)
			- [Schema Definition Language](#schema-definition-language)
			- [Schema Annotation](#schema-annotation)
			- [Schema Document](#schema-document)
			- [SAS Specification](#sas-specification)
	- [Specification](#specification)
		- [Versions](#versions)
		- [Data Types](#data-types)
		- [Rich Text Formatting](#rich-text-formatting)
		- [Relative References in URLs](#relative-references-in-urls)
- [DPDS Dialect](#dpds-dialect)
	- [Basic Meta-Data Annotations Vacabulary](#basic-meta-data-annotations-vacabulary)
		- [Keywords applicable to schema or properties](#keywords-applicable-to-schema-or-properties)
			- [title](#title)
			- [description](#description)
			- [default](#default)
			- [deprecated](#deprecated)
		- [Keywords applicable only to properties](#keywords-applicable-only-to-properties)
			- [writeOnly](#writeonly)
			- [readOnly](#readonly)
	- [Logical Meta-Data Annotations Vacabulary](#logical-meta-data-annotations-vacabulary)
		- [Keywords applicable to schema or properties](#keywords-applicable-to-schema-or-properties-1)
			- [summary](#summary)
			- [modelRole](#modelrole)
			- [tags](#tags)
			- [externalDocs](#externaldocs)
		- [Keywords applicable only to schema](#keywords-applicable-only-to-schema)
			- [owner](#owner)
			- [domain](#domain)
			- [schemaType](#schematype)
			- [modellingStyle](#modellingstyle)
			- [contactPoints](#contactpoints)
			- [status](#status)
		- [Keywords applicable only to properties](#keywords-applicable-only-to-properties-1)
			- [primaryKey](#primarykey)
			- [primaryKeyPosition](#primarykeyposition)
	- [Physical Meta-Data Annotations Vacabulary](#physical-meta-data-annotations-vacabulary)
		- [Keywords applicable to schema or properties](#keywords-applicable-to-schema-or-properties-2)
			- [physicalName](#physicalname)
			- [physicalType](#physicaltype)
		- [Keywords applicable only to properties](#keywords-applicable-only-to-properties-2)
			- [partitionStatus](#partitionstatus)
			- [partitionKeyPosition](#partitionkeyposition)
			- [clusterStatus](#clusterstatus)
			- [clusterKeyPosition](#clusterkeyposition)
		- [Old](#old)
			- [Structural](#structural)
			- [General](#general)
			- [Datastore](#datastore)
			- [Constraints](#constraints)
			- [Extensions](#extensions)
	- [Appendix A: Revision History](#appendix-a-revision-history)


## <a name="definitions"></a>Definitions

#### <a name="definitionsStandard"></a>Standard
The set of shared rules used by different agents to describe an entity or process of common interest. By conforming to these rules, agents limit their autonomy to enable interoperability, allowing for smoother cooperation.

#### <a name="definitionsSpecification"></a>Standard Specification
The formal description of the rules that form a [standard](#definitionsStandard). A standard can have multiple specification versions associated with it. Sometimes the words standard and specification are used as synonymous. 

#### <a name="definitionsDefinition"></a>Standard Definition
The description of one specific entity or process created using and conforming to the set of rules formally described in the [standard specification](#definitionsSpecification)

#### <a name="definitionsSchema"></a>Schema
A schema is a machine-readable description of the structure of a dataset. It can be used to validate the structure of a dataset, to decide how to query it, and to encode the results.

#### <a name="definitionsSchemaDefinitionLanguage"></a>Schema Definition Language
A schema definition language is the formalism used to describe the schema of a dataset (es. JSON Schema, Avro Schema, Protobub, XML Schema, etc...)

#### <a name="definitionsSchemaAnnotation"></a>Schema Annotation
A schema annotation is a piece of information embedded in the schema definition to add metadata related to a specific part of the structure. The annotation is not directly used for validating or encoding the data.

#### <a name="definitionsSchemaDocument"></a>Schema Document
The document (or set of documents) that contains the schema definition.

#### <a name="definitionsSAS"></a>SAS Specification
The list of standard annotations that can be used describes the different parts of the schema defined in a [Schema Document](definitionsSchemaDocument).


## <a name="specification"></a>Specification

### <a name="versions"></a>Versions

The Schema Annotation Specification is versioned using <a href="https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html)" target="_blank">Semantic Versioning 2.0.0:octicons-link-external-24:</a> (semver) and follows the semver specification.

The `major`.`minor` portion of the semver (for example `1.0`) SHALL designate the DPDS feature set. Typically, *`.patch`* versions address errors in this document, not the feature set. Tooling which supports SAS 1.0 SHOULD be compatible with all SAS 1.0.\* versions. The patch version SHOULD NOT be considered by tooling, making any distinction between `1.0.0` and `1.0.1` for example.

Each new minor version of the SAS Specification SHALL allow any schema document that is valid against any previous minor version of the Specification, within the same major version, to be updated to the new Specification version with equivalent semantics. Such an update MUST only require changing the `xxx` property to the new minor version.

For example, a valid schema document annotated using SAS 1.0.2, upon changing its `xxx` property to `1.1.0`, SHALL be a valid schema document annotated with SAS 1.1.0, semantically equivalent to the original schema document. New minor versions of the Schema Annotation Specification MUST be written to ensure this form of backward compatibility.

### <a name="dataTypes"></a>Data Types

Primitive data types in the SAS are based on the types supported by the <a href="https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-core.html#name-instance" target="_blank">JSON Schema Specification:octicons-link-external-24:</a>. 


<a name="dataTypeFormat"></a>Primitives have an optional modifier property: `format`.
DPDS uses several known formats to define in fine detail the data type being used.
However, to support documentation needs, the `format` property is an open `string`-valued property and can have any value.
Formats such as `"email"`, `"uuid"`, and so on, MAY be used even though undefined by this specification.
Types that are not accompanied by a `format` property follow the type definition in the JSON Schema. Tools that do not recognize a specific `format` MAY default back to the `type` alone as if the `format` is not specified.

The formats defined by the DPDS are:

[`type`](#dataTypes) | [`format`](#dataTypeFormat) | Comments
------ | -------- | --------
`integer` | `int32` | signed 32 bits
`integer` | `int64` | signed 64 bits (a.k.a long)
`number` | `float` | |
`number` | `double` | |
`string` | | |
`string` | `alphanumeric` | a string that match the following regex `^[a-zA-Z0-9]+$`
`string` | `name` | a string that match the following regex `^[a-zA-Z][a-zA-Z0-9]+$`
`string` | `fqn` | a string that match the following regex `^[a-zA-Z][a-zA-Z0-9.:]+$`
`string` | `version` | a string that match the following regex `^(0|[1-9]\d*)\.(0|[1-9]\d*)\.(0|[1-9]\d*)(?:-((?:0|[1-9]\d*|\d*[a-zA-Z-][0-9a-zA-Z-]*)(?:\.(?:0|[1-9]\d*|\d*[a-zA-Z-][0-9a-zA-Z-]*))*))?(?:\+([0-9a-zA-Z-]+(?:\.[0-9a-zA-Z-]+)*))?$`
`string` | `byte` | base64 encoded characters
`string` | `binary` | any sequence of octets
`string` | `uuid` | a sequence of 16 octets as defined by <a href="https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4122.html" target="_blank">RFC4122:octicons-link-external-24:</a>
`boolean` | | |
`string` | `date` | As defined by `full-date` - <a href="https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3339" target="_blank">RFC3339:octicons-link-external-24:</a>
`string` | `date-time` | As defined by `date-time` - <a href="https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3339" target="_blank">RFC3339:octicons-link-external-24:</a>
`string` | `password` | A hint to UIs to obscure input.
`string` | `uri` |  a string that match the following regex `^(([^:/?#]+):)?(//([^/?#]*))?([^?#]*)(\?([^#]*))?(#(.*))?`


### <a name="richText"></a>Rich Text Formatting
Throughout the specification `description` fields are noted as supporting CommonMark markdown formatting.
An annotations consumer SHOULD support, at a minimum, markdown syntax as described by <a href="https://spec.commonmark.org/0.27/" target="_blank">CommonMark 0.27:octicons-link-external-24:</a>. Consumers MAY choose to ignore some CommonMark features to address security concerns. 

### <a name="relativeReferences"></a>Relative References in URLs

Unless specified otherwise, all annotations that are URLs SHOULD be absolute references. If an annotation explicitly specifies in its description that allows a relative reference its value MUST be compliant with <a href="https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986#section-4.2" target="_blank">RFC3986:octicons-link-external-24:</a>. Relative references MUST be resolved using the URLs defined in the property description as a Base URI.

Relative references used in `$ref` are processed as per <a href="https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-pbryan-zyp-json-ref-03" target="_blank">JSON Reference:octicons-link-external-24:</a>, using the URL of the current document as the base URI. 

# <a name="dpds-dialect"></a>DPDS Dialect
TODO

## <a name="vocab-meta-data"></a>Basic Meta-Data Annotations Vacabulary

These general-purpose annotation vocabulary defided in [JSON Schema Validation](https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-validation) extension provide commonly used information for documentation and user interface display purposes. They are not intended to form a comprehensive set of features. Rather, additional vocabularies can be defined for more complex annotation-based applications.

The current URI for this vocabulary, known as the Meta-Data Vocabulary, is: [<https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/vocab/meta-data>](https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/vocab/meta-data).

The current URI for the corresponding meta-schema is: https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/meta/meta-data.

*Hereafter are reported all keywords that compose this vocabulary with a short description for convenience. However the normative definition is contained in the [JSON Schema Validation](https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-validation) extension.*

### <a name="vocab-meta-data-element-kws"></a>Keywords applicable to schema or properties

####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-kw-title"></a>title
The value of this keyword MUST be a `string`.  

The human-readable name of the element that can be used by frontend tools. It SHOULD be a short text.

*This description is provided here for convenience, but it is not normative. The normative description is defined in the original vocabulary and can be found [here](https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-validation#name-title-and-description)*

####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-kw-description"></a>description

The value of this keyword MUST be a `string`.

The description of the element. CommonMark syntax MAY be used for rich text representation.

*This description is provided here for convenience, but it is not normative. The normative description is defined in the original vocabulary and can be found [here](https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-validation#name-title-and-description)*


####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-kw-default"></a>default

There are no restrictions placed on the value of this keyword.

The default value of the element if any.

*This description is provided here for convenience, but it is not normative. The normative description is defined in the original vocabulary and can be found [here](https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-validation#name-default)*

####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-kw-deprecated"></a>deprecated

The value of this keyword MUST be a `boolean`.

If `deprecated` has a value of boolean `true`, it indicates that applications SHOULD refrain from usage of the declared property. It MAY mean the property is going to be removed in the future.

A schema containing `deprecated` with a value of `true` indicates that the entire resource being described MAY be removed in the future.

Omitting this keyword has the same behavior as a value of `false`.

*This description is provided here for convenience, but it is not normative. The normative description is defined in the original vocabulary and can be found [here](https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-validation#name-deprecated)*


### <a name="vocab-meta-data-property-kws"></a>Keywords applicable only to properties

####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-kw-writeOnly"></a>writeOnly

The value of this keyword MUST be a `boolean`.

If `readOnly` has a value of boolean `true`, it indicates that the value of the element is managed exclusively by the owner of the underlyng datastore, and attempts by an application to modify the value of this element are expected to be ignored or rejected by that owner.

An schema element that is marked as `readOnly` MAY be ignored if sent to the owning authority, or MAY result in an error,  at the datastore owner's discretion.

*Example-1:*

For example, `readOnly` MAY be used to mark a database-generated serial number as read-only.

```json
{
	"properties": {
		"userId": {
			"type": "string",
			"readOnly": "true"
		}, "username": {
			"type": "string"
		}
	}
}
```


*This description is provided here for convenience, but it is not normative. The normative description is defined in the original vocabulary and can be found [here](https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-validation#name-readonly-and-writeonly)*

####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-kw-readOnly"></a>readOnly

The value of this keyword MUST be a `boolean`.

If `writeOnly` has a value of boolean `true`, it indicates that the value is never present when data is retrieved from the source datastore. It can be present when sent to the owner of the underlying datastore to create a new item or update an existing one.

An schema element that is marked as `writeOnly` MAY be returned as a blank document of some sort, or MAY produce an error upon retrieval, or have the retrieval request ignored, at the datastore owner's discretion.

*Example-1:*

For example, `writeOnly` MAY be used to mark a property whose value is a password.

```json
{
	"properties": {
		"username": {
			"type": "string"
		}, "username": {
			"password": "string",
			"writeOnly": true
		}
	}
}
```

*This description is provided here for convenience, but it is not normative. The normative description is defined in the original vocabulary and can be found [here](https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-validation#name-readonly-and-writeonly)*


## <a name="vocab-meta-data-logical"></a>Logical Meta-Data Annotations Vacabulary

This general-purpose annotation vocabulary, defined as an extension of the Schema Annotation Specification, provides commonly used metadata for annotating schemas at a logical level. This means the keywords in this vocabulary do not include, and will not include in the future, any information about the underlying datastore or details for schema or data validation.

The current URI for this vocabulary, known as the Logical Meta-Data Annotations Vacabulary, is: [<https://dpds.opendatamesh.org/specifications/sas/1.0.0//vocab/logical-meta-data>](<<https://dpds.opendatamesh.org/specifications/sas/1.0.0//vocab/logical-meta-data).

The current URI for the corresponding meta-schema is: <https://dpds.opendatamesh.org/specifications/sas/1.0.0/meta/logical-meta-data.


### <a name="vocab-meta-data-logical-element-kws"></a>Keywords applicable to schema or properties


####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-logical-kw-summary"></a>summary
The value of this keyword MUST be a `string`.

A short human readable description of the schema item. It SHOULD be used by frontend tools to visualize the item description in lists or tooltips where there is not enough space for using the full description.

*Example-1:*

```json
{
  "title": "Leg",
  "summary": "The association between Trasport Units and Trips",
  "description": "A **Leg** is the association between a `Transport Unit` and a specific `Trip`. It represents how individual `Transport Units` are moved during a particular segment of their journey. Multiple  `Leg` can exist for a `Transport Unit` if it is moved across different `Trips` before reaching its final destination. Similarly, a single `Trip` can involve `Transport Units` from multiple `Transport Orders`.",
}
```

####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-logical-kw-modellingStyle"></a>modelRole
The value of this keyword MUST be a `string`

The `modellingStyle` keyword defines the role of a schema element within its specific modelling style, helping to clarify its function in the context of the chosen model. For example, if the `modellingStyle` is set to `starSchema`, the schema might define an entity with a `modelRole` of either `fact` or `dimension`. In this case, the properties of the schema can have a `modelRole` of either `attribute` or `measure`. On the other hand, if the `modellingStyle` is set to `rawDataVault`, the schema might define an entity with a `modelRole` of `hub`, `satellite`, or `link`. This distinction helps clarify the purpose of each element within the overall model.


####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-logical-kw-tags"></a>tags
The value of this keyword MUST be  an `array` of `string`

A list of tags associated to the element.

		
####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-logical-kw-externalDocs"></a>externalDocs
The value of this keyword MUST be  an `array` of `object`

A list of additional documentation for the given element. Each item in the list is a pointer to a specific documentation source described as follow:

Field Name | Type | Description
---|:---:|---
<a name="externalResourceDescription"></a>description | `string` | A description of the target resource. [CommonMark syntax](https://spec.commonmark.org/) MAY be used for rich text representation. 
<a name="externalResourceMediaType"></a>mediaType | `string` | The media type of target resource. It must conform to media type format, according to [RFC6838](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6838).
<a name="externalResourceHref"></a>$href | `string:uri` | **REQUIRED**. The URI of the target resource. It must conform to the URI format, according to [RFC3986](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3986).

*Example-1:*

```json
"externalDocs": [{
  "description": "Find more info here",
  "mediaType": "text/html",
  "$href": "https://example.com"
}]
```
	
### <a name="vocab-meta-data-property-kws"></a>Keywords applicable only to schema

####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-logical-kw-owner"></a>owner

The value of this keyword MUST be a `boolean`

It's the identifier of the subject who owns the schema. It SHOULD be a person or a team. If the schema is not shared, it MUST be equal to the owner of the dataset upon which the schema is defined.


####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-logical-kw-domain"></a>domain
The value of this keyword MUST be a `string`

The domain to which the dataset described by the schema belongs. If the schema is not shared, it MUST be equal to the domain of the dataset upon which the schema is defined.

####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-logical-kw-schemaType"></a>schemaType
The value of this keyword MUST be a `string`

The `schemaType` keyword specifies the structure of the data described by the schema. It indicates whether the data is organized in a tabular format, typical of relational databases (e.g., tables with rows and columns), or in a nested document format, common in document-oriented databases, streaing platforms and RESTFUL API (e.g., JSON or XML with hierarchical relationships). The possible values for this property are:

|value|description|
|---|:---:|
|`tabular`|When the schema doesn't contain properties of type object (i.e. the schema describe a tabular document)|
|`document`|When the schema contains properties of type object (i.e. the schema describe a neasted document)|

*Example-1*

```json
{
    "title": "transportOrder",
	"schemaType": "tabular",
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "orderId": {"type": "integer"},
      "customerName": {"type": "string"},
      "orderDate": {"type": "string"},
      "deliveryDate": {"type": "string"},
      "destination": { "type": "string"},
      "orderStatus": {"type": "string" }
    }
  }
```

*Example-2*

```json
{
    "title": "transportOrderDetail",
	"schemaType": "document",
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "orderId": {"type": "integer"},
      "customerName": {"type": "string"},
      "orderDate": {"type": "string"},
      "deliveryDate": {"type": "string"},
      "destination": { "type": "string"},
      "orderStatus": {"type": "string" },
	  "transportUnits": {
	  	"type": "array",
      		"description": "List of transport units associated with the transport order.",
      		"items": {
        		"type": "object",
        		"properties": {
          			"unitId": {"type": "integer"},
          			"unitDescription": {"type": "string"}
        		}
    		}
  		}
	}
}
```

####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-logical-kw-modellingStyle"></a>modellingStyle
The value of this keyword MUST be a `string`

The `modellingStyle` keyword specifies the data modelling approach or framework within which the structure of the entity described by this schema is defined. This could include frameworks like `starSchema`, `rawDataVault`, or `unifiedStarSchema`, each with its own set of rules for how data is organized, related, and queried. Understanding the modelling style is useful for better contextualizing the schema's structure and gaining a clearer understanding of the roles and relationships of other elements defined within it (see [`modelRole`](#modelRole) keyword).


####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-logical-kw-contactPoints"></a>contactPoints
The value of this keyword MUST be  an `array` of `object`.

A list of contact information for the given schema.


####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-logical-kw-status"></a>status
The value of this keyword MUST be a `string`

The status of schema. It MAY be equals to `development`, `test`, or `production`, depending on how the lifecycle of schema items has been defined.


### <a name="vocab-meta-data-logical-properties-kws"></a>Keywords applicable only to properties

####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-logical-kw-primaryKey"></a>primaryKey
The value of this keyword MUST be a `boolean`. 

If "primaryKey" has a value of boolean `true`, it indicates that property is part of the dataset's primary key
Boolean value specifying whether the field is primary or not.

The default value is `false`.

This field is equivalent to `bitol.schema.primaryKey`

####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-logical-kw-primaryKeyPosition"></a>primaryKeyPosition
The value of this keyword MUST be a `int32`. 

If field is a primary key, the position of the primary key element. Starts from 1. 

The default value is `-1`.

*Example-1:*
Given the table `TRIP` with a composite primary key defined as follow `PRIMARY KEY (UNIT_ID, TRIP_ID, LEG_SEQUENCE)` the annotation of the properties in the schema will be as follow:

```json
	{
		"properties": {
			"UNIT_ID": {
				"type": "string",
				"primaryKey": true,
				"primaryKeyPosition": 1
			},
			"TRIP_ID": {
				"type": "string",
				"primaryKey": true,
				"primaryKeyPosition": 2
			},
			"LEG_SEQUENCE": {
				"type": "integer",
				"primaryKey": true,
				"primaryKeyPosition": 3
			}
		}
	}
```

This field is equivalent to `bitol.schema.primaryKeyPosition`

## <a name="vocab-meta-data-physical"></a>Physical Meta-Data Annotations Vacabulary

### <a name="vocab-meta-data-physical-kws"></a>Keywords applicable to schema or properties

####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-physical-kw-physicalName"></a>physicalName

The value of this keyword MUST be a `string`. 

The name of the element in the source datastore 

*Example-1*:
```json
	{
		"properties": {
			"physicalName": "TRIP",
			"tripId": {
				"type": "string",
				"physicalName": "TRIP_ID"
			}
		}
	}
```

This field is equivalent to `bitol.schema.physicalName`

####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-physical-kw-physicalType"></a>physicalType

The value of this keyword MUST be a `string`.

The type of the element in the source datastore. For schema and object properties MAY be equal to `TABLE`, `VIEW`, etc ... For other proprerty type except Object MAY be equal to `VARCHAR`, `TINNYINT`, etc...

*Example-1*:
```json
	{
		"properties": {
			"physicalType": "TABLE",
			"tripId": {
				"type": "string",
				"physicalType": "INT"
			}
		}
	}
```

This field is equivalent to `bitol.schema.physicalType`

### <a name="vocab-meta-data-physical-kws"></a>Keywords applicable only to properties

####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-physical-kw-partitionStatus"></a>partitionStatus
todo
####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-physical-kw-partitionKeyPosition"></a>partitionKeyPosition
todo

####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-physical-kw-clusterStatus"></a>clusterStatus
todo
####  <a name="vocab-meta-data-physical-kw-clusterKeyPosition"></a>clusterKeyPosition
todo


### <a name="old"></a>Old

#### <a name="structuralAnnotations"></a>Structural
TODO

Name | Scope | Type | Description
---|:---:|:---:|---
<a name="sasId"></a>id | entity, filed | `string` | The unique identifier of the schema item
<a name="sasName"></a>name | entity, filed | `string` | The name of the schema item
<a name="sasRequired"></a>required | filed | `boolean` | `true` if a value for this field is required, `false` otherwise. If not specified a field SHOULD always be considered optional. If in the used schema definition language is explicitly defined that the field is required the value of this annotation MUST be  `true`.
<a name="sasDefault"></a>default | filed | `string` | The default value of the field if any

#### <a name="generalAnnotations"></a>General
TODO

Name | Scope | Type | Description
---|:---:|:---:|---

<a name="sasDisplayName"></a>displayName | entity, filed | `string` | The human-readable name of the item. It SHOULD be used by frontend tools to visualize the schema item's name in place of the name property. 

<a name="sasDescription"></a>description | entity, filed | `string` | The complete description of the schema item. CommonMark syntax MAY be used for rich text representation.

<a name="sasContentEncoding"></a>contentEncoding | filed | `string` | The encoding schema used to encode the field's value (es. `UTF-8`).
<a name="sasContentMediaType"></a>contentMediaType | filed | `string` |  The format used to serialize the field's value (es. `text/html`).
<a name="sasExamples"></a>examples | entity, filed | \[`string`\] | A list of examples on how the schema item can be valorized.
<a name="sasComments"></a>comments | entity, filed | `string` | The comment annotation is strictly intended for adding comments to a schema. Unlike the annotations `title`, `description`, and `examples`, annotation consumers MUST NOT attach any meaning or behavior to it whatsoever, and MAY even strip them at any time. Therefore, they are useful for leaving notes to future editors of the schema, but should not be used to communicate to users of the schema.
<a name="sasExterlaDocs"></a>externalDocs | entity, filed | \[`string:uri`\] | A list of URI to external documentation associated with the schema item
<a name="sasTags"></a>tags | entity, filed | \[`string`\] | A list of tags associated to the schema item.

#### <a name="datastoreAnnotations"></a>Datastore
TODO

Name | Scope | Type | Description
---|:---:|:---:|---
<a name="sasPhysicalName"></a>physicalName | entity, filed | `string` | The name of the schema item in the source datastore (es. `DIM_CUSTOMER`).
<a name="sasPhysicalUniqueQualifiedName"></a>physicalUniqueQualifiedName | entity, filed | `string` | The unique qualified name of the schema item in the source datastore (es. `DBMS.DWH.DIM_CUSTOMER`).
<a name="sasPhysicalType"></a>physicalType | entity, filed | `string` | The type used on the source datastore for the schema item. In the case of entities, MAY be equal to `TABLE`, `VIEW`, etc... For fields, MAY be equal to `VARCHAR`, `TINNYINT`, etc...
<a name="sasReadOnly"></a>readOnly | filed | `boolean` | It's equal to `true` if the value of the field cannot be modified in the source datastore
<a name="sasWriteOnly"></a>writeOnly | filed | `boolean` | It's equal to `true` if the value of the field cannot be read from the source datastore
<a name="sasPartitionStatus"></a>partitionStatus | filed | `boolean` | It's equal to `true` if the field is used to partition the data on the source datastore
<a name="sasPartitionPosition"></a>partitionPosition | filed | `int32` | If the field is used to partition the data on the source datastore this annotation specifies the position of the field in the partition. For example if on the source datastore the data are partitioned along fields `year` and `month` then field `year` MUST have `partitionKeyPosition` equal to 1, while field `month` MUST have `partitionKeyPosition` equal to 2.
<a name="sasClusterStatus"></a>clusterStatus | filed | `boolean` | It's equal to `true` if the field is used to cluster the data on the source datastore
<a name="sasClusterPosition"></a>clusterPosition | filed | `int32` | If the field is used to cluster the data on the source datastore this annotation specifies the position of the field in the cluster. For example if on the source datastore the data are clustered along fields `year` and `month` then field `year` MUST have `clusterKeyPosition` equal to 1, while field `month` MUST have `clusterKeyPosition` equal to 2.

#### <a name="extensionsAnnotations"></a>Constraints
TODO

Name | Scope | Type | Description
---|:---:|:---:|---
<a name="sasUnique"></a>unique | filed | `boolean` | If it is equal to `true`, the field's values MUST NOT be duplicated
<a name="sasNullable"></a>nullable | filed | `boolean` | If it is equal to `false`, the field's values MUST NOT be NULL
<a name="sasPattern"></a>pattern | filed | `string` | The field's values MUST respect the given pattern. The pattern MUST be specified using a regular expression.
<a name="sasFormat"></a>format | filed | `string` | The field's values MUST respect the given format (es. `email`, `hostname`, `uuid`, etc..). The definition of the regular expression to use to validate the field's values according to its format is the responsibility of the annotation consumer.
<a name="sasEnum"></a>enum | filed | \[`string`\] | The field's values MUST be equal to one of the values listed here.
<a name="sasMinLength"></a>minLength | filed | `int32` | The field's values MUST have more characters than the number provided here.
<a name="sasMaxLength"></a>minLength | filed | `int32` | The field's values MUST have fewer characters than the number provided here.
<a name="sasPrecision"></a>precision | filed | `int32` | The field's values MUST have a number of digits, including both digits before and after the decimal point, equal to the number provided here
<a name="sasScale"></a>scale | filed | `int32` | The field's values MUST have a number of digits after the decimal point, equal to the number provided here
<a name="sasMinimum"></a>minimum | filed | `number` | The field's values MUST be greater or equal to the one provided here
<a name="sasExclusiveMinimum"></a>exclusiveMinimum | filed | `number` | The field's values MUST be greater to the one provided here
<a name="sasMaximum"></a>maximum | filed | `number` | The field's values MUST be less or equal to the one provided here
<a name="sasExclusiveMaximum"></a>exclusiveMaximum | filed | `number` | The field's values MUST be less to the one provided here






#### <a name="extensionsAnnotations"></a>Extensions
TODO

Field Pattern | Type | Description
---|:---:|---
<a name="infoExtensions"></a>^x- | Any | Allows extensions to the Data Product Descriptor Schema. The field name MUST begin with `x-`, for example, `x-internal-id`. The value can be `null`, a primitive, an array, or an object. It can have any valid JSON format value.

The extensions may or may not be supported by the available tooling, but those may be extended as well to add requested support (if tools are internal or open-sourced).

## <a name="revisionHistory"></a>Appendix A: Revision History

Version   | Date       | Notes
---       | ---        | ---
1.0.0     | 2024-JUNE	   | Release of the XXX Specification 1.0.0-DRAFT 
1.0.0-DRAFT     | 2023-JANUARY	   | Release of the XXX Specification 1.0.0-DRAFT 

